  So, I’m going to Guatemala. I literally saw a Facebook ad about this and felt this pull, like I HAVE to go on this trip, so here we are. I’m going to Guatemala in about a week. So far I’ve been to Mexico for a church mission trip when I was around seven I believe, up and down California from San Diego to Fort Bragg, Tahoe for vacations, Illinois for family Christmases and couple times when I was little, Hawaii twice with my grandparents when I was five or six and another time after that, and a quick ten day trip across parts of Europe where I went to London and other small parts of England, Paris and Burgundy in France, Lucerne Switzerland, Munich and Dachau in Germany, and Liechtenstein, but I’m about to take a very different kind of trip. No, I’m not talking about drugs. That’s an article for another time.

	This trip is going to be most similar to my trip to Europe so let me explain that a little bit because you need something to compare to for this. Much like my trip to Europe, it’s going to be roughly nine days and be with a group but it’s going to be vastly different this time around. This is in no way saying anything bad about EF Tours but my first trip to Europe was with them. They’re all about educational tours and mostly help people travel throughout Europe. 

	It was the summer after I graduated high school; a group of my wonderful and amazing history teachers from my high school got together and made this happen for us. A group of thirty or so of us made payments for a few months and then all went to Europe together. These payments covered travel accommodations, hotels, breakfast and dinners, tour directors, and entrance fees to some of the places we went, and I’m guessing a fair chunk goes back to the company as well but I’m just speculating. It was an amazing experience and I’d do it again if I had the chance. Though, the thing with going through five countries in ten days; you get to see a lot but there’s a lot of things you miss and sometimes it feels very rushed.

  Even when we were spending time in these cities, we spent a lot of it in buses as someone narrated the important things we were passing while we drove around. As a photographer, it was a little disappointing. I couldn’t take any photographs because things would be on the wrong side of the road, people or things would be in the way, we’d only get a small glimpse as we passed by, or the glare on the window would ruin any decent photo I got. We did get to get out and walk around certain places; Versailles, the Louvre, Notre Dame, Big Ben and The Eye in London which we actually went on. We got a good bit of time to walk around in Switzerland which is why it was one of my favorite stops, along with the one day in London a group of four of us got one of the teachers to branch off and take us to Abbey Road and The Sherlock Holmes Museum. We got to hike up to the Swan Castle in Germany, or Neuschwanstein Castle, rather. I loved all these parts of this trip and I wish we had more time for things like that but we were always rushing on to the next destination. One of which was Dachau which was a very tough experience for me but maybe I’ll get into that another time. Also, because of the way we were crossing borders, we only had a couple passport stamps by the time we finished. We also spent the nights in fairly nice hotels partnered with people we knew and hopefully got along with, which there is absolutely nothing wrong with, just adding that in for comparison to this next part. 

   So, let’s start with what’s similar. I had to pay a program fee for this trip because I’m going with a group called Operation Groundswell: Backpacking with a Purpose. Right off the bat, you can probably tell this is going to be a bit different. My fees are going towards paying for meals, places to sleep at night, and transportation. Meals will be local food involving a LOT of tortillas from what I’ve been being told. Sleeping accommodations will mostly be in the houses of locals on the ground with sleeping pads and sleeping bags. We will get ready in the morning like they do, whether that involves running water or not. Some hosts won’t speak English and we’ll have to try to communicate as best we can. Transportation will be mostly tricked out old school buses that are referred to as Chicken Buses (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jetMcD9h1cg), and of course backpacking. One thing I already love about this organization is that the money I paid is going back to helping the country I’m visiting. They partner with reforestation organizations and locals. Unlike EF Tours, they have a very clear breakdown of what my money is going towards. (http://operationgroundswell.com/programs/fee-contribution/) I did have to pay for my own flights this trip since the other people in my group are coming from all over North America and at least one person I know of is coming from Europe, we all had to be responsible for our own flights. These are people I have never met before and will be meeting for the first, time besides a small video chat we did, when I get to Guatemala.

  EF focuses on Europe because I get it, there’s a lot of history there and they’re an educational tour company. Operation Groundswell gives people the opportunity to travel to countries in Central and South America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East and it’s all about learning and helping others. With this being said, they’re very aware of the “White Savior Complex” and make sure that is not what anyone is here for. We are going to learn and help. We’re there to educate ourselves, not the people who are showing us how they live. I hope it’s okay to include this but here’s an excerpt from one of the things we were given to read:

  “Foster Moral Imperialism
  “This one is the biggest problem, but perhaps the least considered. Many of us assume, because we come from wealthier places with better education systems, that we can come into any new  place without knowing much about the culture or the people, and we can fix things. Many  programs, like some I had done in the past, even allow you to fundraise for your flights to the  project. Who are we to think that our time is so valuable that we should fundraise money to pay  for OUR flights to go do something like paint a school poorly? Development work is complex and  takes time, and the people we are visiting have just as much, if not more to teach us than we have to teach them.
  “Real life example: Just search for voluntourism on the web. "Come to XXXXX Africa and save the world," followed by instructions on how to fundraise tax-free dollars, which include the price of your travel abroad.
  “How to choose: If we are going to send our students abroad without charging them, we should at least tell them the truth: They are the ones benefiting in this situation. If you find a company that discusses the trip as "life-changing" for the communities you are visiting, search further until you find one that admits that the real selling point is that the experience will be life-changing for you. That is OK! That is why we travel, so let's not try to hide that. If people still decide to fundraise for their travel, then they should be honest that the funds are for their learning, not for their helping.”

  Well, that’s all I really have to say for now. I’m super excited and looking forward to this trip. There is a two and a half day hike involved and I get to see a volcano and lots of other cool things. I’ll have my camera on me and keep a journal so I’ll have stories and pictures when I get back.

  Feel free to reach out with any questions, topics you want me to cover, or anything else. You can follow me on Tumblr as well at sarahspeaks.tumblr.com.

  If anyone would like to donate this to this trip you can follow this link here: https://www.gofundme.com/sarahsgoingtoguatemala.
Otherwise I’m hopefully have some photo prints up for sale not too long after I come back.
